---
layout: post
tags: rachilde french
categories: translations
title: The Tooth - Rachilde
subtitle: 
date: 2024-07-22 00:00:00
author: Jake Nabasny
---

# The Tooth
### By Rachilde

In passing by chance the dining room, she saw, on a dresser, a dozen
pistachio croquets, and, mechanically raising her hand up to the silver
plate that supports the appetizing pyramid, she chose the driest and
most glazed, with an inexplicable gluttony... since she is not a
glutton. Suddenly, in crushing the pastry, she felt a hard object, a
small object much harder than the pistachios, and at the same moment a
vibration had run through her entire body, a strange vibration that went
spiraling from her gums to her heels. What? What is this? She removes it
with the tips of her two nails. How! a pebble in a croquet from the good
creator! She approaches the pale green stained-glass window, behind
which extends a dreamy field, all green and pale, then she examines the
pebble very closely with a cold, subtle breath on her hair. It, it's a
tooth!

Horror sweeps her off her feet; she falls to her seat, her pupils
dilated. A tooth! Hers. No, no, it's impossible! Come on, she would have
been suffering already, and she never had a toothache. She is still
young, she takes scrupulous care of her mouth, all while having, it must
be admitted, a profound disgust for the dentist. She probes, there, on
the side, a little behind the smile, and finds that there is a hole. She
leaps up, strikes the stained-glass window with her forehead, looks with
irritated eyes at this little object which gleams with a slightly
yellowish whiteness. Yes, in fact, it's a tooth; it is crowned with a
dark trim at the spot of the break. Worn down, but how long has it gone
on for? Attacked by what? It did not cause her any suffering at first,
and now she found herself plunged into one of those despairs which, for
lasting only one day, are all the more terrible. From now on she has a
defect! A door has just opened on her thoughts, and she will no longer
know how to keep certain words from coming out, without her wanting it,
of her mouth. She isn't old; however Death has just inflicted on her his
first flick of the fingers.

Throwing the remains of the damned croquet on the white and black
checkerboard, funereal tiling of the dining room, she runs away as if
she knew herself to be forever pursued. In her room, carefully shutting
the door, she locks herself in and leans on the mirror. For a tooth!\...
Quiet! It's not so bad. She tries to laugh out loud, and she turns
around frightened. Huh? who laughs thusly? Who laughs with a shadow
between their lips? It's her! Oh! that black star in the middle of that
double white flash! Nothing can be done at this point. And the time is
so distant when she laughed with all her teeth. A wrinkle, this would be
one *more* thing; a white hair, this would be a *new* thing. The one
fewer tooth is an irremediable catastrophe; and if she begged the
dentist to replace her own tooth, it would still be a fake tooth! Oh!
she felt it, when it fell between pieces of the croquet, like a little
cold heart that was escaping from her. She has just exhaled everything
in a miniscule detail of herself. Oh! the atrocious reality! Come on!
come on! have courage! She is a reasonable woman, she will not cry, she
will not tell anything, she will have only this interior exclamation,
frightfully sorry: "Lord! Lord!" Because she is pious and has made for
herself a second husband of God at supreme moments of despondency. When
her mother died, she shouted: "Lord!" Inwardly, also, in the same way.
Tomorrow, she must approach the sacraments, she will have a greater
fervor, that's all, and will not think about it anymore.

Unfortunately, her tongue still thinks about it! With the tip of her
tongue, she performs senseless snakings into that dark corner of her
jaw. She finds there a formidable gap, and she suddenly has, poor woman,
the very absurd vision of a castle of olden times in ruins, gazed upon
during its honeymoon. Yes... she perceives the tower, over there, a
tower which holds at its summit a notched crown, and which hangs, in
thunderstorms, like the unequal jaw of a colossal old\...

Her temples are buzzing. If her husband arrived, she would tell him
everything. Incidentally, he is so discreet, so decent, that she really
hopes\... to hide everything from him. She walks around, tries to calm
herself by closing her eyes in front of the mirror. Then, it's finished,
she will no longer laugh. She will no longer open her mouth wide to
swallow an oyster. Suddenly, she stops\... And love?\... Oh! what a
diabolical joy seizes her in dreaming that she is no longer subject to
the desperate kisses of the honeymoon! And to say that there are wives
who take lovers in order to try to remember those caresses!\... How
virtue seems preferable to her today. She rushes toward a drawer, looks
for a small round case, removes a ring from it, then, with almost
material care and full of superstitious fright, she places her tooth on
the black velvet. How white it is, little dead one! Who killed it? It is
still so healthy despite the brown edging. My God! Is it then true? It
is necessary to be carried off a little every day? And the horrible
thing is that there isn't any other cause for this inexorable, crumbling
(*miette Ã  miette*) departure than the following: good people must
nonetheless die one day. Oh! right now! A revolver! Some poison!\... I
want to be carried off from it completely! And a kind of interior echo
answers her: "You are no longer complete!"

The door is open, her husband gaily enters: "Did you do your
meditations, Bichette?"[^1] Whenever she must take communion the
following day, he does not get any more familiar with her, for delicate
reasons. He is a serious, affectionate husband, full of pretty
kindnesses without being amorous in the least. She has a half-smile.
"Yes, I meditated\... See, do not tease me, I say!" He is seated in
front of her, he pats her thigh for a moment; he wants to chat, to tell
a story, his eyes brilliant. He met the gaze of Sir Silve, that
imbecile\... And he speaks quickly, in order to have time to tell
everything before the polite break in conversation. He is having a
quarrel with Silve, the owner of the adjacent estate, and he never
forgets to denigrate his dogs, his cars, his livery. Back in Paris, they
will be excellent comrades again in their circle, but on holiday he
cannot put up with him, because one of them, the neighbor, possesses the
most beautiful pheasants.

Standing in front of him, she wonders if, out of Christian humility, she
must reveal everything to him. But why deteriorate before his eyes? Her
confessor will not force her. And by listening to him she feels herself
enveloped in an icy mood. She is two, and yet, she is alone. Is there
nothing that can carry you, soulmates, beyond your bodies? And suddenly
a sentence sounds like a shot in her distracted ears. Her husband just
said to her, much gentler than the rest: "See, Bichette, I have it in
(*je lui garde une dent*) for that idiot Silve!"[^2] She topples from
the full height of her long chair. A nervous fit twists her. "Bichette!
What have you? Damn it!\..." She doesn't respond at all. He runs to the
bell, which doesn't vibrate, for an unknown reason, but, while running,
he broke a crystal cornet and the maid suddenly appears, frightened. Now
it undoes her, she is alone; he withdraws, not asking for an
explanation, knowing that she is always nervous on the eve of making her
devotions. She remains alone, she will sleep alone. Oh! so alone with
this ridiculous secret!\... And the following day she wakes up bathed in
sweat, she had strange nightmares: it seemed to her that she was chewing
on her own flesh. She prays, she dresses, supports what is attached,
chooses a thick veil, puts the round case in her pocket. She does not
want to part with it. What if they were to search her furniture?\... She
steps out of the dense park through a hidden exit, stealthily entering
the church. The old priest, a country priest, a heavy man, believes he
must greet her before beginning the mass. At last, waiting for her, the
host between his raised fat fingers, he murmurs: "My God, let me forget
these vanities!" And she advances, eyelids half-closed, and kneels. Oh!
Oblivion and Consolation! Her whole being is drawn toward the region of
mystical union, where kisses are surrendered without care of the number
of teeth. She receives the host, closes her mouth; but while her tongue,
with a smooth and respectful movement, gently turns over the slice of
divine bread, folds it in half to swallow it faster, she guesses
(*devine*) and sees that God has stopped\... He is still not used to it,
and remains in a corner on the side of the little hole! The poor woman
calls to his aid every last bit of saliva. She frantically departs from
the Holy Table, having the sacrilegious desire to spit despite her
fervor. What! Is it the God of charity who is inflicting such
humiliation? If it was ordinary bread, she would understand, but Him!
Then, she detaches him with a brutal blow of her tongue and suddenly
swallows; God disappears, rushes away as if he were afraid, after
finding out. Her face in her clenched hands, she cries. It ends up
relieving her. As she walks down the shady path of the park, she cries
again, although less desperately. A kind of astonishing dryness rises
from her heart to her eyes. Even though death must announce itself from
time to time, without it, happy people would not think about it. She
contemplates a lily standing there, under a tree with trailing branches,
a lily whose sickly whiteness reminds her of her deceased tooth. With a
deep sigh, she removes the small round box from her pocket, kisses it,
digs up the ground, and thrusts into it the tiny coffin which contains
the first piece of her. Disgusted, she presses with all the strength of
her nervous hands, replaces the moss around the lily, which erases all
trace of the burial. Then, lips trembling, she moves away, with a little
bit of dirt beneath her fingernails\...

[^1]: The husband uses the formal *vous* form in this question, which
    explains the following line.

[^2]: *Je lui garde une dent* literally means "I'm keeping a tooth for
    him," which is why Bichette reacts in such a way.
